doc/development-process.md, before:

# Development Process

Depending on your area of focus we're providing guidance of each kind of development setup you might want.

Step one, you **must** have the following things installed:

* [go](https://go.dev) v1.17 -- Primary development language.
* [docker](https://www.docker.com/) -- Used for generating containers & testing kubernetes set-ups.
* [helm](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/) v3. -- Package manager for kubernetes
* [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start#installation) -- Run kubernetes clusters in docker for testing.
* [flux](https://fluxcd.io/docs/get-started/) -- Continuous delivery system for kubernetes that weave-gitops enriches.
* [tilt](https://tilt.dev/) -- Automatically build and deploy to a local cluster.

Now you have those things installed, lets go!

## Quick start development setup

Help me get going as fast as possible!

Create a kind cluster. We'll do this so we can have a local cluster on our machine

`$ kind create cluster --name=<some name>`

Then we install flux on it.

`$ flux install`

Then we bring up tilt.

`$ tilt up`

Tilt will tell you the url, or hit the space bar and it'll automagically open a browser for you which will show your local cluster and the resources running. You should see 3 things, Tiltfile, dev-weave-gitops, uncategorised.

Goto login with username: dev, password:dev at http://localhost:9001/sign_in

When you make changes in the code with this setup, you have to wait for k8s to redeploy the updated pod, it isn't lightening instant fast but **it works** to get you going.

Woop! It's working. It'll be empty cos you haven't created any flux objects. You can jump to [
quickly add a sample workload to UI](#quickly-add-a-sample-workload-to-ui).


## Frontend optimised development setup

Help me I just want super fast frontend development!

Step one, make sure you've installed the tools listed at the very top of this file.

Step two, now you **must** **ALSO** have the following installed.

* [node](https://nodejs.org/en/) v16.13.2 - Install Node.js

Now you have those things installed, lets go!

## Quick start frontend development setup

Create a kind cluster. We'll do this so we can have a local cluster on our machine

`$ kind create cluster --name=<some name>`

Then we install flux on it.

`$ flux install`

Then we bring up tilt.

`$ tilt up`

Then we make our node_modules, this will take a little while.

`$ make node_modules`

Then we fire up our frontend server.

`$ npm start`

Goto login with username: dev, password:dev at http://localhost:4567/sign_in

Running this setup is what enables JavaScript hot reloading, it does websocket pushing of your code, so you don't even need to refresh!

Woop! It's working. It'll be empty cos you haven't created any flux objects. You can jump to [quickly add a sample workload to UI](#quickly-add-a-sample-workload-to-ui).


## Quickly add a sample workload to UI

To help see some objects in the UI lets create some sample sources, run the following:

```
$ flux create source git podinfo \
--url=https://github.com/stefanprodan/podinfo \
--branch=master \
--interval=30m
```

and then this one:

```
$ flux create kustomization podinfo \
--target-namespace=flux-system \
--source=podinfo \
--path="./kustomize" \
--prune=true \
--interval=5m
```

Boom! You'll see our newly created flux objects in the UI.

We use create rather than a flux bootstrap to create because we don't want our tiltfile and flux to start reconciling over each other.

## Other Frontend focussed commands

Lint frontend code with `make ui-lint` - using Prettier (https://prettier.io/) will get you on the right track!

Run frontend tests with `make ui-test`

Update CSS snapshots with `npm run test -- -u`

Check dependency vulnerabilities with `make ui-audit`


## Running tests

You can, at the moment, run two kinds of tests.

Our unit tests:

`$ make unit-tests`

Our frontend tests:

`$ make ui-tests`

We're re-working our integration tests. Coming back soon.


## Other optimisations for development setup

Mostly for backend development, if you want to not wait for k8s to reload the pod, you can go into more detail and install locally a bunch of the dependencies and there's a flag `FAST_AND_FURIOUSER` which you can pass to our tiltfile which will look for your local resources.

Only do this if you know what you're doing or are happy to spend timing learning how to dig around in glitchy figuring out go things on your operating system. Funtimes ahead :)

Step one, make sure you've installed the tools listed at the very top of this file.

Step two, install dependencies and build binaries and assets onto your machine.

`$ make all`

Then let's create a cluster.

`$ kind create cluster --name=<some name>`

Then we install flux on it.

`$ flux install`

Then we bring up tilt, passing it the flag `FAST_AND_FURIOUSER`. This tells our tiltfile we want to use our local resources.

`$ FAST_AND_FURIOUSER=true tilt up`

Goto login with username: dev, password:dev at http://localhost:9001/sign_in

Woop! It's working? Probably. Maybe. Or you may need to faff around with resolving build steps when you did `make all`. 
Good luck!

Commit message:

tools: Get rid of the embedded package manager
Helm, tilt and flux are currently all installed separately, and we
tell you to do so in the development guide.

Envtest was managed by the package manager - I've replaced it with
setup-envtest, which is a tool that sets this up for you.

There's various other things we need. These were variously installed
in different ways. Now, they're all installed with `@go install
package@version` just before it's needed - as long as you have a go
complier (already required), and you've set up your go bin path to be
part of your PATH (which I've added documentation for), it should mean
that all tools will be installed before they're needed, in the version
that is needed, whereas before you just had to remember to run `rm
.deps; make dependencies` from time to time.

I chose to put the versions in the makefile instead of in the tools
file - it means that the protobuf compiler's dependencies won't
interfere with the dependencies of gitops itself, though it does mean
that we might forget to upgrade them.

doc/development-process.md, after:

# Development Process

Depending on your area of focus we're providing guidance of each kind of development setup you might want.

Step one, you **must** have the following things installed:

* [go](https://go.dev) v1.17 -- Primary development language.
* [docker](https://www.docker.com/) -- Used for generating containers & testing kubernetes set-ups.
* [helm](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/) v3. -- Package manager for kubernetes
* [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start#installation) -- Run kubernetes clusters in docker for testing.
* [flux](https://fluxcd.io/docs/get-started/) -- Continuous delivery system for kubernetes that weave-gitops enriches.
* [tilt](https://tilt.dev/) -- Automatically build and deploy to a local cluster.

Now you have those things installed, lets go!

## Quick start development setup

Help me get going as fast as possible!

Create a kind cluster. We'll do this so we can have a local cluster on our machine

`$ kind create cluster --name=<some name>`

Then we install flux on it.

`$ flux install`

Then we bring up tilt.

`$ tilt up`

Tilt will tell you the url, or hit the space bar and it'll automagically open a browser for you which will show your local cluster and the resources running. You should see 3 things, Tiltfile, dev-weave-gitops, uncategorised.

Goto login with username: dev, password:dev at http://localhost:9001/sign_in

When you make changes in the code with this setup, you have to wait for k8s to redeploy the updated pod, it isn't lightening instant fast but **it works** to get you going.

Woop! It's working. It'll be empty cos you haven't created any flux objects. You can jump to [
quickly add a sample workload to UI](#quickly-add-a-sample-workload-to-ui).


## Frontend optimised development setup

Help me I just want super fast frontend development!

Step one, make sure you've installed the tools listed at the very top of this file.

Step two, now you **must** **ALSO** have the following installed.

* [node](https://nodejs.org/en/) v16.13.2 - Install Node.js

Now you have those things installed, lets go!

## Quick start frontend development setup

Create a kind cluster. We'll do this so we can have a local cluster on our machine

`$ kind create cluster --name=<some name>`

Then we install flux on it.

`$ flux install`

Then we bring up tilt.

`$ tilt up`

Then we make our node_modules, this will take a little while.

`$ make node_modules`

Then we fire up our frontend server.

`$ npm start`

Goto login with username: dev, password:dev at http://localhost:4567/sign_in

Running this setup is what enables JavaScript hot reloading, it does websocket pushing of your code, so you don't even need to refresh!

Woop! It's working. It'll be empty cos you haven't created any flux objects. You can jump to [quickly add a sample workload to UI](#quickly-add-a-sample-workload-to-ui).


## Quickly add a sample workload to UI

To help see some objects in the UI lets create some sample sources, run the following:

```
$ flux create source git podinfo \
--url=https://github.com/stefanprodan/podinfo \
--branch=master \
--interval=30m
```

and then this one:

```
$ flux create kustomization podinfo \
--target-namespace=flux-system \
--source=podinfo \
--path="./kustomize" \
--prune=true \
--interval=5m
```

Boom! You'll see our newly created flux objects in the UI.

We use create rather than a flux bootstrap to create because we don't want our tiltfile and flux to start reconciling over each other.

## Other Frontend focussed commands

Lint frontend code with `make ui-lint` - using Prettier (https://prettier.io/) will get you on the right track!

Run frontend tests with `make ui-test`

Update CSS snapshots with `npm run test -- -u`

Check dependency vulnerabilities with `make ui-audit`


## Running tests

You can, at the moment, run two kinds of tests.

Our unit tests:

`$ make unit-tests`

Our frontend tests:

`$ make ui-tests`

We're re-working our integration tests. Coming back soon.


## Other optimisations for development setup

Mostly for backend development, if you want to not wait for k8s to reload the pod, you can go into more detail and install locally a bunch of the dependencies and there's a flag `FAST_AND_FURIOUSER` which you can pass to our tiltfile which will look for your local resources.

Only do this if you know what you're doing or are happy to spend timing learning how to dig around in glitchy figuring out go things on your operating system. Funtimes ahead :)

Step one, make sure you've installed the tools listed at the very top of this file.

Step two, install dependencies and build binaries and assets onto your machine.

`$ make all`

Then let's create a cluster.

`$ kind create cluster --name=<some name>`

Then we install flux on it.

`$ flux install`

Then we bring up tilt, passing it the flag `FAST_AND_FURIOUSER`. This tells our tiltfile we want to use our local resources.

`$ FAST_AND_FURIOUSER=true tilt up`

Goto login with username: dev, password:dev at http://localhost:9001/sign_in

Woop! It's working? Probably. Maybe. Or you may need to faff around with resolving build steps when you did `make all`.
Good luck!

## It doesn't work
What to do when it doesn't work.

### I get a program not found error

Some targets (for example go unit tests, or regenerating protobufs)
install other programs before they start. However, depending on how you
installed go, those programs might not be part of your `PATH`, and thus
not work automatically.

Try running
```
PATH=$PATH:$(go env PATH)/bin
export PATH
```
and then running the command again. If that fixes it, you should add
that snippet to your shell's automatic startup - how to do that
depends on your shell, OS and version, but adding it to the bottom of
whichever one of `.bashrc`, `.bash_profile` or `.zshrc` you can find
in your home directory usually does the trick.
